>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JULY 22: RENEWED
FOCUS ON JEFF SESSIONS AND WHAT
HE MAY HAVE DISCUSSED WITH THE
RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR DURING LAST
YEAR'S PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN;
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
BAIL REFORM.
MOST DEFENDANTS AWAITING TRIAL
IN ONE STATE NO LONGER NEED TO
PAY TO GET OUT OF JAIL.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP IS
DEFENDING HIS CONSTITUTIONAL
POWER TO GRANT PARDONS FOR
CRIMES.
AS PART OF A SERIES OF
STATEMENTS ON TWITTER TODAY, MR.
TRUMP SAID:
THE WORD "COMPLETE" GARNERS
ATTENTION AS ONLY TWO DAYS AGO
THE "WASHINGTON POST" REPORTED
THE PRESIDENT AND HIS LEGAL TEAM
HAVE DISCUSSED HIS POWER TO
PARDON AIDES, FAMILY MEMBERS AND
POSSIBLY HIMSELF.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO LAMBASTED
YESTERDAY'S "POST" REPORT THAT
FORMER RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR SERGEY
KISLYAK TOLD HIS SUPERIORS IN
MOSCOW HE HAD DISCUSSED CAMPAIGN
RELATED MATTERS WITH ATTORNEY
GENERAL JEFF SESSIONS LAST YEAR,
SOMETHING MR. SESSIONS HAS
DENIED UNDER OATH.
THAT ARTICLE, BASED ON
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE OF
KISLYAK'S COMMUNICATIONS, SAID
KISLYAK CLAIMED HE HAD
"SUBSTANTIVE" DISCUSSIONS WITH
THEN-SENATOR SESSIONS ABOUT
CANDIDATE TRUMP'S POSITIONS ON
RUSSIA-RELATED ISSUES.
MR. TRUMP SAID:
A SESSIONS SPOKESWOMAN DECLINED
TO COMMENT ON WHAT SHE CALLED A
"WHOLLY UNCORROBORATED
INTELLIGENCE INTERCEPT," BUT
ADDED, SESSIONS STANDS BY HIS
TESTIMONY THAT HE:
TODAY, IN NORFOLK, VIRGINIA, MR.
TRUMP HELPED COMMISSION A NAVY
AIRCRAFT CARRIER HONORING THE
ONLY PRESIDENT TO PARDON
ANOTHER.
THE U.S.S. "GERALD R. FORD" COST
$13 BILLION AND TOOK EIGHT YEARS
TO BUILD.
FORD PARDONED RICHARD NIXON
AFTER NIXON RESIGNED OVER THE
WATERGATE SCANDAL.
THE PRESIDENT'S SON AND THE
PRESIDENT'S FORMER CAMPAIGN
CHAIRMAN WILL TALK TO
CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATORS IN
PRIVATE.
DONALD TRUMP, JR. AND PAUL
MANAFORT WILL MEET WITH THE
SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE NEXT
WEEK AS PART OF ITS PROBE OF
RUSSIAN MEDDLING IN LAST YEAR'S
ELECTION.
THE COMMITTEE IS ALSO
NEGOTIATING FOR TRUMP JR. AND
MANAFORT TO TURN OVER RELEVANT
DOCUMENTS.
THEY FACE QUESTIONS ABOUT A
TRUMP TOWER MEETING WITH A HOST
OF RUSSIANS WHO HAD BOASTED OF
HAVING NEGATIVE INFORMATION
ABOUT HILLARY CLINTON.
THE PRESIDENT'S SON-IN-LAW AND
SENIOR ADVISER JARED KUSHNER,
WHO ALSO ATTENDED THAT MEETING,
HAS AGAIN REVISED HIS FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURE FORMS, WHICH ARE
REQUIRED OF TOP ADMINISTRATION
APPOINTEES.
IN THE PAPERWORK FILED
YESTERDAY, KUSHNER REVEALS 77
PREVIOUSLY UNDISCLOSED ASSETS
WORTH BETWEEN $10 MILLION AND
$50 MILLION.
HIS ART COLLECTION ALONE IS
WORTH BETWEEN $5 MILLION AND
$25 MILLION.
KUSHNER, WHO RUNS HIS FAMILY'S
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE COMPANY,
SAID THE ASSETS WERE
"INADVERTENTLY OMITTED" BEFORE.
HIS WIFE, FIRST DAUGHTER IVANKA
TRUMP, SUBMITTED HER FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURE FORMS FOR THE FIRST
TIME ON FRIDAY.
THE REPORT SHOWS ASSETS WORTH
$66 MILLION AND EARNINGS OF
$13.5 MILLION LAST YEAR,
INCLUDING MORE THAN $2 MILLION
FROM THE NEW TRUMP HOTEL NEAR
THE WHITE HOUSE.
CONGRESS APPEARS TO HAVE REACHED
A BIPARTISAN COMPROMISE FOR
TOUGHER SANCTIONS ON RUSSIA AND
PREVENTING THE PRESIDENT FROM
EASING THEM ON HIS OWN.
THE BILL WOULD IMPOSE NEW
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS ON RUSSIAN
INDUSTRIES AND INDIVIDUALS.
IT IS SCHEDULED FOR A VOTE
TUESDAY IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION HAS
CONSIDERED RETURNING DIPLOMATIC
PROPERTIES IN MARYLAND AND NEW
YORK TO RUSSIA AND ASKED FOR
FLEXIBILITY TO DEAL WITH RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN.
THE BILL ALSO ADDS SANCTIONS ON
ANYONE INVOLVED IN IRAN'S
MISSILE PROGRAM AND BLOCKS NORTH
KOREAN SHIPS AND GOODS FROM
ENTERING THE U.S.
>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW, U.S.
IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS ARE
EXPECTED TO BEGIN FOUR DAYS OF
NATIONWIDE RAIDS TARGETING
TEENAGERS SUSPECTED OF BELONGING
TO GANGS.
THE PLAN IS OUTLINED IN A
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
DOCUMENT SEEN BY REUTERS.
REPORTER JULIA EDWARDS AINSLEY
BROKE THE STORY AND JOINS ME NOW
FROM WASHINGTON.
SO WHAT'S THE PLAN AND HOW IS
THIS DIFFERENT?
>> THE DOCUMENT OUTLINES SEVERAL
KEY DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS THEY WANT
TO BE TARGETED IN THESE RAIDS BY
I.C.E. AGENTS.
THE ONE THAT WAS THE MOST
STRIKING DEPARTURE FROM POLICY
THAT WE SAW UNDER THE PREVIOUS
ADMINISTRATION IS THE TARGETING
OF 16- AND 17-YEAR-OLDS WHO ARE
SUSPECTED OF GANG ACTIVITY.
U.S. IMMIGRATIONS TOLD ME THAT
THEY CAN MEET TWO OR MORE
CRITERIA.
THOSE CRITERIA COULD BE THINGS
LIKE A GANG TATTOO, WEARING GANG
APPAREL, OR JUST HANGING OUT IN
AN AREA THAT'S FREQUENTED BY
GANGS.
SO OF COURSE THERE ARE A NUMBER
OF IMMIGRATION LAWYERS AND CIVIL
RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES
LAWYERS WHO ARE SAYING THAT IS
NOT ENOUGH TO FIND SOMEONE -- TO
MAKE SOMEONE A TARGET FOR
DEPORTATION, ESPECIALLY A MINOR.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DIFFERENT IS
THIS FROM THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S INTERESTS?
WHAT WAS THE THRESHOLD THERE
VERSUS WHAT THIS IS?
>> SO IT'S INTERESTING, AS I
WENT BACK AND I READ THE
NOVEMBER 2014 PRIORITIES FOR
DEPORTATION THAT OBAMA SET OUT.
AND THAT DID MENTION 16- AND
17-YEAR-OLDS, BUT THEY WERE
PEOPLE WHO HAD BEEN CONVICTED OF
A GANG-RELATED CRIME.
THAT WAS HIS WAY OF SAYING THAT
ALTHOUGH THESE PEOPLE ARE
MINORS, THEY'VE ENTERED ANOTHER
CATEGORY BY COMMITTING A CRIME,
LIKE WHEN WE SEE A JUVENILE GETS
AN ADULT KIND OF SENTENCE IN
COURT.
THIS CHANGES THAT, OF COURSE,
BECAUSE THESE ARE PEOPLE JUST
SUSPECTED OF GANG ACTIVITY.
>> Sreenivasan: IF YOU ARE IN
THE NEIGHBORHOODS, BECAUSE YOU
LIVE THERE, THAT ALREADY KIND OF
CHECKS OFF ONE OF THE BOXES,
RIGHT?
SO BASICALLY YOU CAN'T ESCAPE
THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND MOVE
SOMEWHERE ELSE TOMORROW TO GET
AWAY FROM THESE RAIDS.
>> I KNOW, I THINK THAT WAS
PROBABLY THE MOST STRIKING THING
THAT I SAW ON THAT LIST, WAS
HANGING OUT IN THESE PLACES
NOTORIOUS FOR GANG ACTIVITY.
I MEAN, THAT COULD BE A
SCHOOLYARD, THAT COULD BE RIGHT
OUTSIDE OF YOUR PUBLIC SCHOOL.
THAT COULD BE A PARKING LOT OF A
GROCERY STORE WHERE YOUR FAMILY
WOULD FREQUENT.
AND FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE THERE'S
REALLY NO WAY TO GET AROUND
THAT.
AND AS I WAS TOLD, THERE ARE A
LOT OF PEOPLE, PARTICULARLY
THOSE WHO HAVE FLED VIOLENCE, IN
PLACES LIKE EL SALVADOR WITH THE
NOTORIOUS MS-13 GANG, THAT HAS
STRONG ROOTS IN THE UNITED
STATES, A LOT OF TIMES THOSE
PEOPLE COME HERE, LIVE IN
COMMUNITIES OF OTHER EL
SALVADORANS, WITH PEOPLE WITH
STRONG TIES TO THAT GANG.
AND THEY HAVE NO CHOICE BUT TO
GET A TATTOO, OR THEIR LIVES
COULD BE THREATENED.
>> Sreenivasan: APPAREL, I MEAN,
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT GOES
BACK TO, BACK WHEN THIS
CONVERSATION WAS BETWEEN THE
CRIPS AND THE BLOODS IN L.A., IN
THE '80s AND '90s.
OH, WHAT ARE THE COLORS, WHAT'S
THE UNIFORM.
>> RIGHT.
I DO ACTUALLY REMEMBER BEING IN
THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS WHERE THERE
WAS A RULE IN MY PUBLIC SCHOOL,
I THINK, AGAINST WEARING ALL
BLUE OR ALL RED, BECAUSE THOSE
WERE DAYS WHERE THAT WAS SEEN AS
A GANG AFFILIATION.
SOME OF THIS ALSO COULD HAVE
CHANGED.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF GANGS THAT
AREN'T AS OVERT.
THE BOTTOM LINE IS THESE AREN'T
LEGAL DEFINITIONS OF WHAT MAKES
SOMEONE A GANG MEMBER, AND IT'S
NOT EVEN ILLEGAL TO BE A GANG
MEMBER.
BUT AT THIS POINT, I.C.E.-- U.S.
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT, CAN WRITE THE RULES
OVER WHOEVER THEY WANT TO TARGET
BECAUSE IT'S ALREADY A CRIME TO
BE IN THE UNITED STATES
ILLEGALLY, AND SO THEREFORE THEY
CAN COME UP WITH DIFFERENT
CATEGORIES OF WHO THEY WANT TO
TARGET THAT REALLY ISN'T BASED
ON U.S. CRIMINAL CODE IN ANY
WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: JULIE EDWARDS
AINSLEY OF REUTERS, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN A PERSON IS
ARRESTED AND CHARGED WITH A
CRIME, THE IDEA BEHIND BAIL IS
SIMPLE: SOMEONE WHO POSTS CASH
TO GET OUT OF JAIL BEFORE TRIAL
IS MORE LIKELY TO RETURN TO
COURT THAN TO FORFEIT THE MONEY.
BUT LIBERAL AND CONSERVATIVE
CRITICS OF THE SYSTEM SAY IT
UNJUSTLY INCARCERATES NON-
VIOLENT DEFENDANTS-- ESPECIALLY
THE POOR-- BEFORE THEY'RE
CONVICTED OF ANY CRIME, AND THAT
IT WASTES TAXPAYER DOLLARS TO
DETAIN THEM.
THIS WEEK, TWO U.S. SENATORS,
DEMOCRAT KAMALA HARRIS AND
REPUBLICAN RAND PAUL, PROPOSED
FEDERAL GRANTS FOR STATES TO
DEVISE A NEW SYSTEM.
THE SENATORS POINTED TO NEW
JERSEY AS ONE OF THE MOST
EXEMPLARY BAIL REFORMS IN THE
NATION.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S MEGAN
THOMPSON REPORTS ON HOW IT'S
WORKING THERE.
THIS STORY IS PART OF OUR
ONGOING "CHASING THE DREAM"
SERIES ON POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA.
>> YES, COMING FROM THE STORE,
YOU KNOW, I WAS ON THE WAY, YOU
KNOW, TO MY GRANDMOTHER'S HOUSE,
YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: ONE EVENING IN
2010, MUSTAFA WILLIS WAS WALKING
TO VISIT HIS GRANDMOTHER IN
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY, WHEN POLICE
STOPPED HIM ON THE STREET.
>> "PUT YOUR HANDS UP."
I PUT MY HANDS UP.
HE SAID, "DON'T MOVE."
CHECKED ME, PLACED ME UNDER
ARREST.
THE SERGEANT SAID, YOU KNOW,
"TELL ME WHOSE GUN THIS IS, AND
WE'LL LET YOU GO."
AND I SAID, "OFFICER, I DON'T
KNOW NOTHING ABOUT NO GUN.
I'M NOT FROM AROUND HERE."
>> Reporter: HE WAS ARRESTED FOR
HAVING A STOLEN GUN, A CHARGE HE
DENIED.
HE SAYS BAIL WAS SET AT $50,000,
WHICH MEANT HE HAD TO COME UP
WITH $5,000, OR 10%, FOR A BAIL
BOND IN ORDER TO GO FREE.
BUT AT THE TIME, HE WAS MAKING
ONLY ABOUT $1,200 A MONTH AFTER
TAXES AS A TRUCK DRIVER'S
ASSISTANT.
COULD YOU AFFORD TO PAY $5,000
TO GET OUT OF JAIL?
>> NO, MA'AM.
>> Reporter: HOW LONG DID YOU
SIT IN JAIL FOR?
>> THREE MONTHS.
>> Reporter: DURING THOSE THREE
MONTHS, WILLIS LOST HIS JOB,
MISSED THE FUNERAL OF A COUSIN,
AND DEVELOPED HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE, HE SAYS, FROM THE
STRESS OF BEING IN JAIL.
>> I JUST WANTED TO BE HOME WITH
MY FAMILY.
LIKE, THAT... THAT WAS REALLY
IT.
LIKE, IT WAS JUST HELL FOR ME.
>> Reporter: WILLIS GOT OUT
AFTER THE JUDGE REDUCED HIS
BAIL, AND, EVENTUALLY,
PROSECUTORS DROPPED ALL THE
CHARGES.
BUT WILLIS AND HIS FAMILY STILL
HAD TO PAY BACK THE $3,000 BOND.
>> BAIL WAS ORIGINALLY SET FOR,
I THINK, $200,000 OR $250,000.
>> Reporter: IN 2015, JAMES
LUMFORD SPENT EIGHT MONTHS IN
JAIL IN NEWARK BECAUSE HE
COULDN'T MAKE BAIL AFTER HE SAYS
HE WAS FALSELY ACCUSED OF ARMED
ROBBERY.
>> BEING LOCKED UP INTO THAT
SITUATION, YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT
YOU CAN GET INTO IN THERE.
AN ALTERCATION CAN HAPPEN AT ANY
POINT IN TIME.
>> Reporter: WHILE HE WAS IN
JAIL, HIS PARTNER AND HER
CHILDREN WERE EVICTED FROM THEIR
APARTMENT.
DESPERATE TO GET OUT AND SUPPORT
HIS FAMILY, HE PLED GUILTY TO A
CRIME HE SAYS HE DIDN'T COMMIT.
HE NOW WORKS AS A PLUMBER BUT
SAYS OTHER JOBS MAY BE HARD TO
GET.
>> A DECENT PAYING JOB, I CAN'T
PASS A BACKGROUND CHECK BECAUSE
THAT'S GOING TO POP UP.
>> Reporter: ACROSS NEW JERSEY,
NEARLY 40% OF THE PEOPLE HELD IN
JAIL WERE THERE SIMPLY BECAUSE
THEY COULD NOT AFFORD BAIL,
ACCORDING TO A 2013 STUDY.
ACROSS THE NATION, BLACK AND
LATINO DEFENDANTS ARE OFTEN THE
LEAST ABLE TO PAY.
>> I FOUND PROBABLE CAUSE.
IT'S PROVABLE.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAME TIME,
POTENTIALLY VIOLENT PEOPLE WHO
HAD MONEY EASILY POSTED BAIL AND
WALKED FREE, SAYS NEW JERSEY
SUPERIOR COURT JUDGE ERNEST
CAPOSELA.
BECAUSE THE STATE CONSTITUTION
USED TO REQUIRE BAIL FOR MOST
CASES, CAPOSELA SAYS JUDGES DID
SOMETHING PROBLEMATIC-- SETTING
BAIL EXTREMELY HIGH IN ORDER TO
KEEP SOME DEFENDANTS BEHIND
BARS.
>> SO, YOU KNOW, $500,000 BAIL,
$1 MILLION BAIL.
IF I SET A BAIL ON YOU AND I
KNOW YOU CAN'T MAKE IT, THAT'S
AN EXCESSIVE BAIL.
THAT VIOLATES THE EIGHTH
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
IT VIOLATES THE PRESUMPTION OF
INNOCENCE.
IT... IT WASN'T, IN MY OPINION,
AN HONEST, INTELLIGENT SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: IN 2014, SPURRED BY
JUDGES AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE
REFORM ADVOCATES, NEW JERSEY
CHANGED ITS PRETRIAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM IN TWO WAYS.
ONE, VOTERS APPROVED AN
AMENDMENT TO THE STATE
CONSTITUTION GIVING JUDGES THE
POWER TO DETAIN WITHOUT BAIL
ANYONE WHO POSES A THREAT OR A
FLIGHT RISK.
TWO, THE NEW JERSEY STATE
LEGISLATURE PASSED A BILL TO
ABOLISH CASH BAIL FOR MOST
NONVIOLENT DEFENDANTS.
IT ALSO SET UP A NEW SYSTEM TO
MONITOR RELEASED DEFENDANTS, AND
REQUIRED PROSECUTORS TO TRY
CASES MORE QUICKLY.
THE BILL PASSED WITH BIPARTISAN
SUPPORT, WAS SIGNED BY
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR CHRIS
CHRISTIE, A FORMER FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR, AND WENT INTO EFFECT
IN JANUARY.
>> WE NOW HAVE A CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM THAT WILL PERMIT
OUR JUDGES TO KEEP THE TRULY
DANGEROUS SOCIOPATH BEHIND BARS,
BUT WILL RELEASE THOSE NON-
VIOLENT OFFENDERS WHO HAVE ONLY
REMAINED IN JAIL BECAUSE THEY
ARE POOR.
>> THIS IS A DETENTION HEARING,
ALL RIGHT?
THEY USED TO BE CALLED A BAIL
HEARING, BUT WE HAVE A NEW
SYSTEM NOW.
>> Reporter: JUDGE CAPOSELA
PRESIDES OVER THE PASSAIC COUNTY
COURT IN PATERSON, NEW JERSEY'S
THIRD-LARGEST CITY.
IT'S A LOW-INCOME AREA WITH ONE
OF THE STATE'S HIGHEST CRIME
RATES.
IN THE NEW SYSTEM CAPOSELA
HELPED DEVISE, JUDGES AND
ATTORNEYS NOW RELY ON A PUBLIC
SAFETY ASSESSMENT, OR P.S.A., TO
PREDICT THE RISK A DEFENDANT
POSES.
A COMPUTER ALGORITHM EVALUATES
NINE RISK FACTORS, LIKE WHETHER
DEFENDANTS HAVE PRIOR VIOLENT
CONVICTIONS OR FAILURES TO
APPEAR IN COURT.
JOHN HARRISON OVERSEES THE NEW
PRETRIAL SERVICES PROGRAM FOR
PASSAIC COUNTY.
>> NOW, IF SOMEONE FAILS TO
APPEAR IN THE LAST TWO YEARS, IT
GOES UP.
>> Reporter: DEFENDANTS RECEIVE
TWO SCORES, FROM ONE TO SIX.
>> SHE RESULTS AS A FIVE, FOUR.
>> Reporter: THE SCORES PREDICT
THE LIKELIHOOD THE DEFENDANT
WILL FAIL TO APPEAR, AND COMMIT
NEW CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
THE LOWER THE SCORES, THE BETTER
THE CHANCE THE P.S.A. WILL
RECOMMEND THE DEFENDANT BE
RELEASED.
>> ALL RISE.
>> Reporter: LATER, WHEN THE
DEFENDANT APPEARS IN COUNTY
COURT-- IN THIS CASE, BY VIDEO
FROM JAIL-- THE JUDGE USES THE
P.S.A. SCORE TO DECIDE HOW
SHE'LL BE MONITORED AFTER
RELEASE.
>> YOU HAVE TO REPORT ONE TIME
PER WEEK TO PRETRIAL SERVICES.
ONCE BY... ONE WEEK BY PHONE,
ONE WEEK IN PERSON.
>> Reporter: IF THERE'S A
SERIOUS CRIME OR A HIGH P.S.A.
SCORE, THE PROSECUTOR CAN FILE A
MOTION TO DETAIN.
THAT TRIGGERS A SECOND HEARING,
HELD WITHIN ABOUT A WEEK.
LAWYERS PRESENT EVIDENCE ARGUING
WHETHER THE DEFENDANT SHOULD BE
JAILED OR LET GO.
>> THERE WAS A PAIR OF SILVER
SCISSORS COVERED IN WHAT
APPEARED TO BE BLOOD.
>> Reporter: THIS MAN, CHARGED
WITH AGGRAVATED MANSLAUGHTER,
HAD A HIGH P.S.A. SCORE OF FIVE
AND FIVE, AND HE'S FLAGGED AS
BEING PRONE TO VIOLENCE.
>> SO, FOR ALL THOSE REASONS, HE
WILL BE REMAINED DETAINED.
>> Reporter: THIS MAN WAS
ACCUSED OF DRUG POSSESSION AND
HAS A HISTORY OF OTHER CHARGES,
AND FAILING TO APPEAR.
HE GOT THE HIGHEST P.S.A. SCORES
POSSIBLE-- SIX AND SIX-- BUT
JUDGE CAPOSELA HAS THE
DISCRETION TO WEIGH OTHER
FACTORS.
>> I'M ALSO SENSITIVE TO THE
FACT THAT HE'S WORKING, AND HE'S
SUPPORTING FOUR CHILDREN.
SO, I'M SATISFIED THAT I'LL
RELEASE HIM ON LEVEL THREE.
CONDITION OF YOUR LEASE,
THOUGH-- AND I VERY RARELY DO
THIS-- YOU HAVE TO BE EMPLOYED,
ALL RIGHT?
WE'RE GOING TO MONITOR YOU NOW.
YOU ALL RIGHT?
ALL RIGHT.
>> Reporter: HE WILL HAVE TO
CHECK IN REGULARLY WITH THE
COURT BEFORE HIS TRIAL, PART OF
THE NEW MONITORING SYSTEM.
>> DON'T LET ME DOWN, MR.
LIGHTY.
>> I WON'T.
>> Reporter: THE MOST HIGH-RISK
DEFENDANTS GET ELECTRONIC
BRACELETS.
DEFENDANTS ALSO RECEIVE PHONE
CALLS, TEXTS AND EMAILS TO
REMIND THEM OF COURT DATES.
BEFORE, UNDER THE OLD SYSTEM,
DID YOU HAVE THE OPTION TO
JUST... TO WAIVE BAIL?
>> THE PROBLEM WITH THAT WAS, WE
DIDN'T HAVE MONITORING BACK
THEN.
SO, NOW, WHEN WE DO IT, THERE'S
A... A GREAT COMFORT LEVEL
BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO BE
MONITORING THOSE FOLKS.
>> Reporter: SINCE NEW JERSEY
ENDED CASH BAIL, 17,550
DEFENDANTS WERE CHARGED WITH
STATE CRIMES DURING THE FIRST
FIVE MONTHS OF THIS YEAR; ALMOST
THREE QUARTERS WERE RELEASED
WITH MONITORING, CLOSE TO 10%
WERE RELEASED WITH NO
MONITORING, AND 13% WERE
DETAINED IN JAIL.
THE STATE JAIL POPULATION HAS
DROPPED BY 19% SINCE THE START
OF THE YEAR DUE TO BAIL REFORM
AND ALSO THE FACT THAT POLICE
ARE ISSUING MORE SUMMONSES WITH
NO ARREST FOR SOME LOW-LEVEL
CRIMES.
>> I THINK THE NEW SYSTEM IS
WORKING.
>> Reporter: PASSAIC COUNTY
PUBLIC DEFENDER DANIEL PALAZZO
SAYS CASES WERE HARDER TO WIN
WHEN HIS LOW-INCOME CLIENTS SAT
IN JAIL BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T
POST BAIL.
THE NEW, SPEEDY TRIAL
REQUIREMENTS WEREN'T IN PLACE,
AND PROSECUTORS HAD LEVERAGE TO
OBTAIN A GUILTY PLEA.
>> AND THE CASE JUST SITS, AND
IT GETS LONGER AND LONGER AND
LONGER.
AND EVENTUALLY, SOMEBODY SAYS,
"I GIVE UP.
I WANT MY FREEDOM BACK."
>> Reporter: JUST LIKE WHAT
HAPPENED TO JAMES LUMFORD, WHO
PLED GUILTY TO A CRIME HE SAYS
HE DIDN'T COMMIT.
BUT THE NEW "NO BAIL" SYSTEM HAS
VOCAL OPPONENTS.
BAIL BONDSMEN SAY IT'S PUTTING
THEM OUT OF BUSINESS.
AND IN MAY, AFTER COMPLAINTS
FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT, NEW JERSEY
STATE COURTS CHANGED THE P.S.A.
ALGORITHM TO AUTOMATICALLY
RECOMMEND DETENTION FOR AN
EXPANDED LIST OF CRIMES, LIKE
GUN POSSESSION, AND FOR
DEFENDANTS WHO RE-OFFEND WHILE
ON RELEASE.
>> I'VE NOT HEARD ONE CHIEF SAY
ANYTHING POSITIVE ABOUT THIS
BAIL REFORM.
>> Reporter: JOSEPH WALKER IS
THE POLICE CHIEF IN RINGWOOD, A
TOWN IN PASSAIC COUNTY.
>> IT TREATS OFFENDERS AS IF
THEY WERE VICTIMS.
THEY HAVE NO CONCERN FOR THE
VICTIMS THAT WE ARE SWORN TO
PROTECT AND SERVE.
>> Reporter: WALKER SAYS POLICE
OFFICERS ARE FRUSTRATED SEEING
SUSPECTS THEY ARREST BACK OUT ON
THE STREETS SO SOON.
>> IT'S A SHAME THAT WE WASTE
TIME ARRESTING PEOPLE OVER AND
OVER AGAIN, AND THEY KEEP ON
RELEASING THEM.
I MEAN, OUR OFFICERS FEEL LIKE
IT'S A SLAP IN THE FACE BECAUSE
THEY'RE WORKING HARD TO DO A
GOOD CASE, WHETHER IT BE DRUGS,
OR CAR BURGLARIES, OR WHATEVER.
THEY GET DOWN THERE, AND THEY
GET RELEASED.
THEN, THEY'RE OUT PROBABLY DOING
IT AGAIN.
>> Reporter: UNDER THE OLD
SYSTEM, THAT PERSON COULD'VE
POSTED BAIL AND ALSO BEEN
RELEASED, RIGHT?
>> YEAH, BUT IF HE WAS RELEASED
AND RE-ARRESTED, THE BAIL THAT
HE WAS RELEASED ON WOULD BE
REVOKED.
SO, THERE'S A MONETARY PENALTY
RIGHT OFF THE BAT.
NOW, THEY DON'T HAVE TO POST
ANYTHING.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO SECURE
THEY JUST WALK FREE.
>> Reporter: WALKER POINTS TO
NEWS REPORTS OF FREED SUSPECTS
COMMITTING CRIMES, LIKE THE CASE
OF A RELEASED MAN WHO ALLEGEDLY
MURDERED HIS GIRLFRIEND BEFORE
COMMITTING SUICIDE.
THE STATE HAS NO DATA YET ON HOW
MANY PEOPLE HAVE COMMITTED
CRIMES WHILE OUT BEFORE TRIAL.
THERE HAVE BEEN INSTANCES OF
PEOPLE WHO'VE GOTTEN OUT UNDER A
BAIL REFORM AND COMMITTED SOME
VERY SERIOUS CRIMES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Reporter: IS THERE A RISK TO
PUBLIC SAFETY?
>> THE ANSWER IS: NO MORE THAN
THE MONETARY BAIL BECAUSE, ONE,
WE'RE MONITORING THESE FOLKS.
AND WE HOPE THAT THE PUBLIC,
ONCE THEY START TO UNDERSTAND
IT, WILL, YOU KNOW, APPROVE OF
IT AND BECOME ACCEPTING OF IT.
WE DID NOT INSTITUTE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE REFORM TO PUT BAIL
BONDSMEN OUT OF BUSINESS AND TO
CLEAR OUT THE JAILS.
IT WAS TO RESPECT THE
PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE, TO
DESIGN, YOU KNOW, A SYSTEM THAT
WAS FAIR AND HONEST.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW
INVESTIGATIVE SERIES FROM
PROPUBLICA CALLED "BOMBS IN OUR
BACKYARD" LOOKS AT THE DISPOSAL
OF MILITARY WASTE AND HOW IT'S
AFFECTING COMMUNITIES AROUND THE
UNITED STATES.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH THE
AUTHOR OF THE SERIES, ABRAHM
LUSTGARTEN, FROM THE NEWSHOUR
STUDIOS IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
GIVE US AN OVERVIEW.
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS THE PROBLEM
OF MILITARY WASTE DISPOSAL IN
THE UNITED STATES?
>> STARTING AT WORLD WAR I,
EVERY BOMB, EVERY BULLET, EVERY
WEAPON THAT WE HAVE DEVELOPED
FOR DEFENSE PURPOSES HAS BEEN
DEVELOPED, DESIGNED,
MANUFACTURED, THROUGH INDUSTRIAL
PROCESSES, THEN TESTED, AND
EVENTUALLY IN MANY CASES
DISPOSED OF AS THEY GET OLD
AND EXPIRE ON AMERICAN SOIL.
>> Sreenivasan: AREN'T THERE
ALREADY ENVIRONMENTAL
REGULATIONS FROM THE E.P.A. OR
OTHER PLACES THAT WOULD PROTECT
WATER OR AIR QUALITY?
I MEAN, DOES THE MILITARY HAVE
AN EXEMPTION FROM THOSE?
>> YEAH, I MEAN, THERE ARE
STRINGENT ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY REGULATIONS,
SOME OF WHICH APPLY TO THE
PENTAGON AND SOME WHICH DON'T.
IN THE CASE OF OPEN BURNS, THE
PENTAGON'S ESSENTIALLY BURNING
WHAT'S DEFINED AS HAZARDOUS
WASTE.
AND THE E.P.A. REGULATED THE
BURNING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE BACK
IN THE 1980s.
SO, 30 YEARS OR SO YEARS AGO.
EXPLOSIVES WERE ADMITTEDLY
DIFFICULT TO DEAL WITH.
SO AT THE TIME THEY CREATED A
LITTLE BIT OF A LOOPHOLE THAT
SAID THAT THE PENTAGON AND OTHER
SPECIALIZED COMPANIES THAT DEAL
ONLY IN EXPLOSIVES CAN CONTINUE
TO BURN THAT STUFF IF THAT'S THE
ONLY WAY THEY CAN GET RID OF IT,
BUT ONLY UNTIL THEY IMPROVE
TECHNOLOGY, FIGURE OUT A BETTER
WAY TO DEAL WITH IT, AT WHICH
POINT THEY WOULD BE REQUIRED BY
THE REGULATIONS TO MOVE TO THOSE
ALTERNATIVES.
THOSE NOW EXIST, THEY HAVE FOR A
LONG TIME, BUT THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE STILL LEANS VERY HEAVILY
ON BURNING AS THEIR STANDBY
PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW WIDESPREAD
IS THIS AROUND THE COUNTRY?
I MEAN, YOU HAVE A MAP IN ONE
OF YOUR STORIES.
HOW MANY DIFFERENT SITES ARE
THERE THAT ARE DOING THIS THAT
COULD BE OF CONCERN TO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT THEY'RE IN?
>> SO, WE OBTAINED A LIST THAT
HAD BEEN COMPILED INTERNALLY
WITHIN THE E.P.A., AND IT LISTED
JUST ABOUT 200 SITES.
197 SITES ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
WHERE BURNS HAD BEEN DOCUMENTED.
NOT ALL OF THOSE ARE STILL
OPERATING NOW.
THERE ARE ABOUT 60 SITES STILL
OPERATING NOW, ABOUT 51 OF WHICH
ARE OPERATED DIRECTLY BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR ITS
CONTRACTORS, AS OPPOSED TO NASA,
AND A COUPLE OF OTHER PRIVATE
COMPANIES.
THOSE SITES STILL TODAY BURN
ANYWHERE FROM A COUPLE HUNDRED
THOUSAND POUNDS OF EXPLOSIVES A
YEAR, UP TO 15 MILLION POUNDS OF
EXPLOSIVES A YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ONE OF THE
PLACES THAT YOU PROFILED
ACTUALLY HAD AN ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL NOT TOO FAR AWAY, THERE
WERE PEOPLE THAT WERE ON
ADJACENT FARMS.
WHAT ARE THE KIND OF HEALTH
CONSEQUENCES THEY'RE HAVING?
>> IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT TO KNOW
WHAT THE DIRECT CONSEQUENCES ARE
OF THE BURNING.
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT IN THE
PLACE THAT I LOOKED AT, RADFORD,
VIRGINIA; COLFAX, LOUISIANA IS
ANOTHER TOWN; AND IN OTHER
PLACES, THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
APPEAR TO HAVE UNUSUALLY HIGH
RATES OF ILLNESSES.
THEY'RE CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT'S
CAUSING THOSE ILLNESSES.
THEY SUSPECT IT COULD BE TIED TO
THE POLLUTION.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT'S WELL
DOCUMENTED, AND DISCLOSED, THAT
THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL POLLUTION,
THAT THE POLLUTION POSES A
SUBSTANTIAL HEALTH THREAT.
BUT PART OF WHAT WE FOCUSED ON
IN THIS STORY THIS WEEK IS THE
LACK OF AN EFFORT TO TRY TO
BRIDGE THAT QUESTION AND THAT
ANSWER.
THERE'S REALLY BEEN REMARKABLY
LITTLE ATTENTION PAID TO TRYING
TO DETERMINE WHETHER PEOPLE ARE
ACTUALLY GETTING SICK FROM THESE
OPERATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
ABRAHM LUSTGARTEN FROM
PROPUBLICA, JOINING US FROM SAN
FRANCISCO TODAY.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A WEEK AFTER THE
FATAL POLICE SHOOTING OF A YOGA
INSTRUCTOR FROM AUSTRALIA,
MINNEAPOLIS HAS A NEW POLICE
CHIEF.
JANEE HARTEAU RESIGNED FROM THE
JOB YESTERDAY, SAYING LAST
SATURDAY'S SHOOTING OF JUSTINE
DAMOND-- AND OTHER SIMILAR
INCIDENTS-- DO NOT REFLECT THE
WAY SHE TRAINED OFFICERS OVER
THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
AN OFFICER SHOT DAMOND AS SHE
WAS WALKING TOWARD THEIR SQUAD
CAR AFTER DAMOND CALLED 911 TO
REPORT A POSSIBLE ASSAULT
OUTSIDE HER HOME.
INVESTIGATORS SAY THEY'VE SPOKEN
TO A WITNESS WHO SAW OFFICERS
PERFORM C.P.R. ON DAMOND.
THE PENTAGON IS EXPRESSING
CONDOLENCES FOR AN ERRANT AIR
STRIKE BY THE U.S. MILITARY IN
AFGHANISTAN YESTERDAY.
IT KILLED A DOZEN FRIENDLY
AFGHAN SECURITY FORCES.
THE AIR STRIKE HAPPENED IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE DAY DURING A JOINT
OPERATION AGAINST TALIBAN
FIGHTERS IN HELMAND PROVINCE, IN
SOUTHERN AFGHANISTAN.
THE PROVINCIAL GOVERNOR SAYS THE
OFFENSIVE KILLED 70 TALIBAN
FIGHTERS.
THE TALIBAN HAS RECLAIMED
CONTROL OVER 40% OF THE COUNTRY.
ISRAELI SECURITY FORCES HAVE
RETALIATED FOR YESTERDAY'S FATAL
STABBING OF A JEWISH FAMILY IN
THEIR HOME IN THE ISRAELI-
OCCUPIED WEST BANK.
TODAY, ISRAELI SOLDIERS RAIDED
AND PLANNED TO DEMOLISH THE WEST
BANK HOME OF THE 20-YEAR-OLD
PALESTINIAN ATTACKER.
HE KILLED A MAN AND THE MAN'S
TWO CHILDREN, AND WOUNDED THE
MAN'S WIFE.
THE ATTACKER WAS SHOT AND
DETAINED BY POLICE.
THE ATTACKER'S FATHER SAYS HIS
SON WAS UPSET OVER THE DEATHS OF
THREE PALESTINIANS EARLIER IN
THE DAY, DURING VIOLENT PROTESTS
IN JERUSALEM.
THOSE PROTESTS WERE OVER METAL
DETECTORS THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT
HAS INSTALLED AT THE ENTRANCE TO
THE PLAZA WHERE THE AL AQSA
MOSQUE STANDS.
PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS SAYS HE IS FREEZING TIES
WITH ISRAEL UNTIL THE METAL
DETECTORS ARE REMOVED.
FOR MORE ON THE RESIGNATION OF
MINNEAPOLIS POLICE CHIEF JANEE
HARTEAU, VISIT OUR WEB SITE:
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: SOUTH AFRICAN
GOLFER BRANDON GRACE SHOT A 62
AT TODAY'S THIRD ROUND OF THE
BRITISH OPEN, THE LOWEST 18-HOLE
SCORE AT A MAJOR CHAMPIONSHIP IN
157 YEARS.
BUT HE'S SEVEN SHOTS BEHIND
AMERICAN JORDAN SPIETH HEADING
INTO TOMORROW'S FINAL ROUND.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.